---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2020-07-22
author: Cayle Sharrock
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Developer update
subtitle:
class: subpage
---

The mobile community is working on the following features to make Aurora even better:

* Automated backups and wallet restore is currently in beta testing. A full roll-out of this highly anticipated
  feature is expected in the next week or so, barring any unexpected roadblocks.
* The Android version of Aurora is also getting its own automated release process on Github actions. When live, this
  will free up several hours a week for the lead maintainer to focus on building awesome features for Aurora rather than
  wrestling with the Android build process and the Play store.
* The Aurora community is currently discussing some new designs for the transaction feed, which aims to bring more
  information about your transactions front and centre and,
* (I love this one) a Nav bar to help you find several great features that are currently hidden away a little bit.

Things are also moving on the protocol and base node front:

* Work has started on cleanly separating the wallet process from the base node executable. This feature will take some
  effort and so is an ongoing process.
* A few of the core protocol contributors have started working on a merge mining implementation for Monero. This is
  likely to take a few months, so even though the overall proof-of-work strategy has not been finalised yet, merge
  mining will be in the picture, so it makes sense to get a head start on that.
* There's also some work going on looking at a few reliability edge cases that popped up during the last stress test.
