---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2020-06-04
author: Cayle Sharrock
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Base node v0.3.0 release
subtitle:
class: subpage
---

## Tari base node v0.3.0 release

Tari Base Node v0.3.0 is [available for download](https://tari.com/downloads)!

**Note:** This release includes a breaking change to the local blockchain DB. A node upgrading to this version will need to delete its existing db and resync the blockchain.

*Important:* You do not need to delete your wallet. Fake funds are SAFU.

To reset your database, follow these steps:

1. Stop your node.
1. Locate your Tari data folder. The default locations are `~/.tari` on Mac or Linux and `%USERPROFILE%\.tari-testnet` under Windows.
1. Delete the `rincewind/db` and `rincewind/peer_db` folders in their entirety. You can leave `dht.db`, and the `wallet` directory intact.
4. Restart your node. Re-syncing takes an hour or more right now.

## New Features in this release

* Several of back-end changes (hence the need to reset the db) to accommodate pruned mode nodes.
* Several new gRPC endpoints for use by the block explorer (and future wallets) (#1922)
* Increase redundancy for Store and Forward messages (#1929). This PR increases the number of nodes
  that will see and store a SAF message when it reaches the neighbourhood of the destination.
* Have Messaging protocol substreams close after a period of inactivity (#1913)

### Bug fixes

* Fix mobile build by emitting `cargo:rerun-if-changed` directive automatically for protobuf (#1926)
* Fix missing Source and Destination Pubkeys in FFI Transaction Cancellation callback return (#1933)


