---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2021-11-18
author: SW van Heerden
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Atomic swaps
class: subpage
---

## Tari Atomic swaps

The release of version 0.21.2 the Tari Console wallet now supports atomic swaps with multiple coins. When Tari released
[TariScript](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/tari/TariScript_for_dummies) on testnet, this allowed much more advanced payment
ideas than standard vanilla MimbleWimble such as [One-sided payments](https://www.tari.com/updates/2021-06-03-update-57.html)
and [Atomic swaps](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/protocols/AtomicSwaps). While almost all of these advanced features were
possible the moment TariScript launched on testnet, let’s be honest handcrafting transactions is complex. 

With this release, we added support via CLI and GRPC commands to initiate, claim and refund atomic swaps with all crypto
coins that support [HTLCs](https://hackernoon.com/what-are-hashed-timelock-contracts-htlcs-application-in-lightning-network-payment-channels-14437eeb9345)
with a SHA256 pre-image. This means that any crypto coin that can unlock some payment via some SHA256 can do atomic swaps
with Tari, including Bitcoin, Litecoin, and many more. So what does all this mean? Well, with this new release, all your
atomic swaps are just a command away. We have written a handy example [guide](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/development/docs/src/btc_atomic_swap.md)
taking you through step by step to do an atomic swap with Bitcoin, the steps are exactly the same for the rest.

Let us dig a bit deeper into how this all functions and what the process is. We can divide this whole 
process into the following steps:

* The Tari initiation.
* The Other coin initiation.
* The other coin finalization.
* The Tari finalization.
* And if something goes wrong somewhere: Refunds. 

One crucial step that is always hinted at but not always directly mentioned is that the two persons doing the atomic
swaps need to communicate out of band with each other to exchange information.

### Tari initiation

This step is the first step whereby we start the whole processing by sending a Tari HTLC transaction. This step will be
where you initiate and broadcast the atomic swap HTLC to the network. Your local wallet will provide you with crucial
information required to move forward, such as the pre-image, pre-image hash, and the hash of the output created on the
blockchain. The pre-image needs must be kept secret as this is your key to claiming your coins on the other blockchain,
and revealing it to the other person will break the security of the atomic swap. The hashed pre-image and the hash of
the output need to be provided to the other person. 

The newly created output will be saved in your local wallet as potential time-locked input. More on that later. 

### Other coin initiation

 Here is where the other person needs to commit to their funds on the other blockchain. This transaction creates an HTLC
 that has the same pre-image as the Tari one. This can be a complicated step as this is where they will need to make the
 custom transactions for the other blockchain, but luckily we have tools that will create all of this. 

### Other coin finalization

This is where you claim your coins from the other blockchain. Remember that secret pre-image created in the first step;
here is where you use it to claim your funds on the other blockchain. Again, this step could be complex, but luckily, we
have tools to simplify this by following the easy [steps](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/development/docs/src/btc_atomic_swap.md). 

### Tari finalization

This is where the other person uses the secret pre-image that you just revealed in claiming your coins on the other
blockchain. They can use this to claim the Tari you put up for the exchange. This is also just a signal step they have
to call on their wallet using the pre-image and hash of the output. The wallet will search the blockchain for the output
and transfer it to a wholly-owned UTXO. 

### Refunds

The refunds ensure that everyone can reclaim all their funds if something goes wrong and nothing gets lost. On the Tari
side, the refunds are handled in one of two ways:

* Automatic: This is where the wallet will automatically reclaim the funds for you. The wallet will store when this UTXO
becomes spendable, and when possible, it will try to spend this UTXO before spending any other UTXO. 
* Manual: This is where you can yourself issue the wallet with the instruction to reclaim the refunds immediately and
respond to a new UTXO given that the timelock has expired for them UTXO. 
