---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2022-06-24
author: Hansie Odendaal
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Bulletproofs+
subtitle: ...so, what is different?
class: subpage
---

Tari Bulletproofs+ (BP+) implements _Bulletproofs+: Shorter Proofs for Privacy-Enhanced Distributed Ledger [2]_, derived 
from the original Bulletproofs (BP) work _Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Confidential Transactions and More [1]_. The 
former offers a 96 bytes shorter proof size than the latter, with added benefits for Tari Script and smart contracts and more efficient verification.

Let us remind ourselves what the primary use case for BP (and now BP+) is on the Tari blockchain. Our tokens are 
essentially Pedersen Commitments, e.g. `C(v,k) = (v.H + k.G)`, with `v` being the value and `k` being the blinding 
factor or spending key. We need to provide proof for any interested verifier, like a base node, that the value of our 
token is not less than zero. If the latter were allowed, we would be able to inflate the mined base layer tokens or 
tXTR. Such a proof is called a _range proof_.

We have already stated that with BP+ we save the 96 odd bytes per proof. Another immediate win for Tari is the ability 
of BP+ that lets a verifier proof batches of range proofs in powers of two. Let's say a verifier has 19 proofs to 
verify; it will be submitted as batches of 16, 2 and 1 for optimum performance. (_Some batch verification benchmarks are 
posted [here](https://github.com/tari-project/bulletproofs-plus)._)

Similar to BP, BP+ also supports rewinding the proof for wallet recovery as well as aggregated range proofs to the power 
of two, thus 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and so on, with the only exception that rewinding only works for non-aggregated proofs.

BP+ range proofs also offer the ability to prove an arbitrary minimum value other than zero, which may be anywhere 
between zero and up to the actual value being committed to. In this case, the minimum value becomes part of the 
statement, together with the Pedersen commitment, that the verifier needs to verify the proof. Arbitrary minimum value 
proofs open several compelling use cases, which could be a future blog post topic.

Lastly, BP+ introduces the notion of extended commitments and extended range proofs. What this means is that it enables 
us to create other dimensions of tokens apart from the base layer token, tXTR, which could nicely live on a side chain. 
If we add two base points to the default Pedersen Commitment, we get an extended Pedersen Commitment defined as 
`C(v,k1,k2,k3) = (v.H + k1.G1 + k2.G2 + k3.G3)`. In this case, `v` is the value, `k1` is the blinding factor or spending 
key, and `k2` and `k3` are adding two additional dimensions such as an asset ID and serial number. Mind-boggling, but 
that being said, this is _really_ a topic for a future blog post.

## References

[1] [Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Confidential Transactions and More](https://eprint.iacr.org/archive/2017/1066/20220414:014622)

[2] [Bulletproofs+: Shorter Proofs for Privacy-Enhanced Distributed Ledger](https://eprint.iacr.org/archive/2020/735/20200618:154806)