---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2022-07-22
author: brianp
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: "Demystifying complex corners: Tari's LMDB Wrapper"
class: subpage
---

Jumping into a new codebase can be daunting. Everything is new again, something that seems familiar has the sense of
just being a little off. Getting your bearings can take time but you're a great developer and you always make it work.

Today what I want to do is introduce you to a complex area of code within Tari so while you're contributing, if you
come across it you'll have a better idea of what's going on and how to manage it. I'll give you a brief history of what
this code does, and why it works the way it works.

# [Our LMDB Wrapper](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs)

## What is LMDB?

LMDB is a compact, memory-efficient database. All data is exposed via a memory map which allows for blazingly fast
reads.

## What is Tari using LMDB for?

The Tari Base node uses LMDB as a backend store for chain related data. Simply put, we store the
blockchain in it. We were using lmdb in Tari production but we had been using an in-memory database for tests.
Part of the original design of the `BlockchainBackend` trait and main goal was to abstract away any database specifics
so
we could implement common data stores or in-memory data stores without a problem. Go figure modeling
transactions, or read & write locks in memory doesn't always map easily to transactions or locks in other
databases. It required us to make bug fixes twice over and also resulted in the possibility of the tests passing while
the production interface still failed. This resulted in a lot of bugs and time spent managing the in-memory adapters
instead of on the fun problems.
Eventually all of the in-memory data store was also swapped for lmdb but the remnants of the common interface remain.

## How Tari implemented LMDB?

Let's take a few steps back. We have many modules in the Tari repository and code reuse across them is common. I
mean why wouldn't you when you have the flexibility. As a result, we write abstractions to wrap functionality as each of
the dependent modules may want to use that functionality differently. Let's dive into
the [chain_storage module](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage). The
module is designed around managing blockchain state. It is written to allow configuration of the chain state to be
defined by the needs of the module. You may wish to store the UTXO set in memory, and the kernels backed by LMDB, while
the merkle trees are stored in flat files for example. To make this work our `chain_storage` module has
a `BlockchainDatabase` struct.

```rust
pub struct BlockchainDatabase<B> {
    db: Arc<RwLock<B>>,
    validators: Validators<B>,
    config: BlockchainDatabaseConfig,
    consensus_manager: ConsensusManager,
    difficulty_calculator: Arc<DifficultyCalculator>,
    disable_add_block_flag: Arc<AtomicBool>,
}
```

This struct is used to compose the API for storing and retrieving blockchain data. I won't get into too much detail
about its attributes but the quick rundown is:

- `db`: Thread safe access to the backend of choice
- `validators`: Used to decide if the block going into the db is valid
- `config`: Configuration options (horizon for pruning etc.)
- `consensus_manager`: Consensus rules
- `difficulty_calculator`: Rules and expectations for mined blocks
- `disable_add_block_flag`: A flag to prevent propagated blocks from being added during block sync

The part we care about most though is `<B>` `where B: BlockchainBackend`.

`BlockchainBackend` is a trait that defines behaviour for database wrappers that store blockchain data. Using the trait
allows us to make some guarantees such as using `Send`, and `Sync` (rusts automatically derived, methodless, marker
traits) to guarantee thread safety, as well as atomic transactions to ensure database integrity.

Here is where LMDB enters the picture again. We've written an `LMDBDatabase` struct which implements
the `BlockchainBackend` trait. This allows us to define a wrapper that promises we meet all the necessities to operate
as a
blockchain backend, and ensures the functionality to host that data in LMDB. You may have already taken a peek
and noticed we have an `lmdb_db` subfolder in our `chain_storage` module folder. Within the subfolder we have two
similarly
named files:

- [base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs)
- [base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs)

So what gives? What's the separation of concerns here and who's doing what job exactly? Great question! I'm glad you
asked.

### Let's start with `lmdb_db.rs`.

This is where our implementation of a `BlockchainBackend` occurs. We've implemented all
the necessary methods here, and it provides the API that is commonly used throughout different Tari clients. But it does
a lot more. lmdb is a key, value store and as such it doesn't represent just a single database, but the possibility of
many databases where each is an independent key, value store. but it is capable of cross database reads
and writes in a single atomic transaction. If you wanted to map the concept to something more
familiar you might think about each database as a table. Back to `lmdb_db.rs`, where
we [define all the different databases](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs#L126-L149)
we want to store into. It'll create the databases if they don't exist and keep a reference to each, so that they are
readily
available. It also attempts to handle some additional transaction locking for us but we'll get into that a little later.

### What `lmdb.rs` offers

Consider `lmdb.rs` just a smidge closer to the actual database. Something between our wrapper abstraction, and the lmdb
interface. It's designed to perform very specific tasks on the databases. It provides utility functions used within
the `chain_storage` module. De-duping inserts, counts, gets, sets,
matching, and filtering results. It's a module of functions we commonly need when we're about to finalize a transaction.
Where `lmdb_db.rs` may perform some additional transformation before passing the results we actually want to store down
to the functions in `lmdb.rs`. Most of these functions will be called from our `LMDBDatabase` wrapper, although it's not
always a guarantee, sometimes we use them directly from other call points withing the `chain_storage` module.

## Caveats of the existing interface

Earlier I mentioned that the `BlockchainDatabase` had ReadWriteLock applied to the backend
interface `db: Arc<RwLock<B>>`.
This was needed in the rust realm after experiencing some unexpected behaviour from our abstraction.
This as it turns out was a result of the API we made public via the `BlockchainBackend`
trait.
Take for example, a situation where different threads are operating on the same database. Under the hood of our
convenience methods we gain read and write locks for each independent call, but still leaves room for error:

```rust
db.add_person("Peter", 3) ?;

thread::spawn(| | {
    db.add_person("Sam", 23) ?;
    if db.person_exists("Peter") ? { db.delete_person("Peter") ?; }
});

thread::spawn(| | {
    db.add_person( & tx, "Tom", 66) ?;
    
    if db.person_exists("Peter")? {
        // ❌  There is a chance that peter is deleted between checking for Peter's existence and deleting
        db.delete_person("Peter") ?;
    }
});
```

This could be solved a handful of ways, but we'll look specifically at two ways to achieve safety here. If we go back
into the helper functions performing calls to lmdb via the `lmdb.rs` we notice they actually take
a [transaction in their signatures](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs#L54)
. This makes it easy to chain different functions together and ensure they are run as single atom transaction. lmdb
supports atomic
transactions, and our interface here lets us utilize those features at the database level.

The problem arises in aligning the outer abstraction for different backend types. The `LMDBDatabase` has convenience
methods for us to operate on the database but unlike the slightly lower level `lmdb.rs` functions these methods do not
accept a transaction as an argument. This means if we call two different methods on the database wrapper, each method
will utilize a different transaction and ensure no atomicity. As a solution for this we wrap the whole database wrapper
in a `RwLock` forcing us to acquire a lock to the entire database for the duration of our processing. Ensuring nobody
can perform a sneaky delete out from underneath us.

This means we have got two locks happening when we perform any operation. A language specific lock, as well as a
database specific lock.  If we
wanted to try and tidy up our double lock situation we once again have two clear candidates for refactoring. We could
introduce the transaction passing present in the underlying `lmdb.rs` interface to the outer trait. This would offer us
the same level of atomicity the lower level `lmdb.rs` but we end up moving the implementation details of a
particular backend to the forefront of our generic. At that point it's arguable we may not need the generic at all. If
we revisit the definition of our `BlockchainBackend` trait it says:

> The backend *must* also execute transactions atomically; i.e., every operation within it must succeed, or they all
> fail

It lets us know that an operation we call on the backend will happen atomically, but doesn't make the promise that
operations called
together will happen atomically. If we as the developers are utilizing multiple methods of the `LMDBBackend` together
and
require atomicity then this can be a red flag for us. Instead of calling multiple methods on the wrapper itself, we can
create one specific method that performs this series of calls with the needed level atomicity. Using our previous
example of finding a person "Peter" and removing him if found, we can get a safer guarantee from our backend if we merge
the two independent backend methods. Instead of calling `person_exists` and `delete_person` we can create a new
method `delete_person_if_exists`.

From this:

```rust
    // The db method implementation abridge

fn person_exists(&mut self, name: String) -> Result<bool, Error> {
    let txn = self.transaction()?;
    self.read_from_table(txn, "People", name).is_some()
}

fn delete_person(&mut self, name: String) -> Result<bool, Error> {
    let txn = self.transaction()?;
    self.delete_from_table(txn, "People", name)
}

if db.person_exists("Peter") ? {
    // ❌  There is a chance that peter is deleted between checking for Peter's existence and deleting
    db.delete_person("Peter") ?;
}
```

To this:

```rust
fn delete_person_if_exists(&mut self, name: String) -> Result<(), Error> {
    let txn = self.transaction()?;
    if let Some(person) = self.read_from_table(txn, "People", name).is_some() {
        self.delete_from_table(txn, "People", name);
    };
}

db.delete_person_if_exists("Peter") ?
```

This gives us the level of atomicity we want while also keeping our generic interface absent of backend specific
details. If we follow this pattern of identifying areas similar to this, and ensuring we push the complexity of the
transactions down to the implementation than we could safely remove our outer language specific lock. This begs the
question though:
Would we want to? This pattern gives us everything we want but also moves the dangers of getting it wrong back onto the
developer, and reviewers. They need to know this pattern exists, and needs to be rigidly adhered too at the risk of
causing race conditions or other bugs. Sticking to a common pattern in a codebase is a good idea but sometimes you could
use just a little more safety, so why not let the language make those promises for you.

## Contribute to Tari!

Thanks for coming along on this journey with me, I hope it helped pull back the veil and gives you a bit of perspective
as to how Tari works under the hood and some reasons for utilizing redundancy across language, and database features which
may not always be obvious at first glance. If simplifying and improving ergonomics is your thing, why not contribute?
Check out our [open issues](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/issues), and if you are just starting out look for
our ["good first issue"](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22)
tag.