---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2023-02-15
author: swvheerden
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: "Ledger with RUST"
class: subpage
---

So I heard you want to do Hardware wallets with Ledger, but you don't want to code C or JS. Well, reading [Ledger](https://developers.ledger.com/)'s website you would be forgiven for thinking you are out of luck. 
But wait luckily there exists a way of using RUST to create from the Ledger application running on BOLOS to the standalone application running on whatever platform you want. 


## So what's the official stance?

Officially according to Ledger [documentation](https://developers.ledger.com/docs/embedded-app/introduction/) if you want to write an embedded BOLOS application you have to write C code and only Linux as an OS is supported for the development environment. Although Windows gets unofficial support through its own [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) program which runs a very light Linux VM inside of windows, MacOS support is completely lacking. 
For application development, support exists for mobile through [BLE](https://developers.ledger.com/docs/transport/react-native-bluetooth-android/), [react](https://developers.ledger.com/docs/transport/react-native-android-hid/) for android only, and for desktop, this is limited to [NodeJS](https://developers.ledger.com/docs/transport/node-electron-hid/).

## What are we going to try to accomplish?
We are going to see if we can create and load a sample BOLOS application with RUST without the use of an FFI onto a Ledger NanoS+ using MacOS. We also need to create a desktop application counterpart for this BOLOS application. Because we are going to attempt to use RUST this process should be multi-platform working on Linux and Windows.
The complete code for the BOLOS application and Desktop application can be found here: [github](SOMELINK)

## The development environment
I am going to assume your machine already has a running RUST environment setup, and by running. 
We can double-check this by opening up a terminal window and running:
```
rustup --version

rustup 1.25.2 (17db695f1 2023-02-01)
info: This is the version for the rustup toolchain manager, not the rustc compiler.
info: The currently active `rustc` version is `rustc 1.69.0-nightly (e1eaa2d5d 2023-02-06)`
```

For loading a BOLOS application to a Ledger device, Ledger has written a command, called [Cargo Ledger](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/cargo-ledger). This we need to install with:
```
cargo install --git https://github.com/LedgerHQ/cargo-ledger
```

Next up we need to install the supporting Python libraries from Ledger to control Ledger devices, [LedgerCTL](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledgerctl). This we do with:
```
pip3 install --upgrade protobuf setuptools ecdsa
pip3 install ledgerwallet
```

Lastly install the ARM GCC toolchain: `arm-none-eabi-gcc` for your OS. We are using MacOS, so we can use brew with:
```
brew install armmbed/formulae/arm-none-eabi-gcc
```

That's it for the development environment

## The BOLOS application
The BOLOS application runs on the Ledger device itself and thus needs to be super simple. And to give you an idea of how low performant they are, they only have 64kb of RAM, use 32-bit only, and have about 1.5Mb of storage with the NanoS+. Compare this to modern smartphones with an excess of 6Gb of RAM and 128Tb of storage. 
This means we need to target a small footprint application targeting the llvm-target: `thumbv8m.main-none-eabi` with no `std` support. Compiling RUST without `std` can limit our choices of both internal and external libraries we can use, but it at least means we can run our RUST application on the Ledger. 

To start us off, Ledger has started a process of providing a [RUST SDK](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledger-nanos-sdk/) proving access to underlying access to secure chip running inside of BOLOS as well as commutation out to some external application. 

For the BOLOS application, we are going to do two commands: `get-version` and `sign-data`. With `get-version` returning some information about the BOLOS application and `sign-data` signing a challenge with a randomly created private key, returning the public key, nonce, and Schnorr signature. 

Let's go over the RUST code to sign the challenge and return the results:
```rust
match comm.next_event() {
    io::Event::Command(Instruction::Sign) => {
        // first bytes are instruction details
        let offset = 5;
        let challenge = ArrayString::<32>::from_bytes(comm.get(offset, offset + 32));

        let k = RistrettoSecretKey::random();
        let r = RistrettoSecretKey::random();
        let signature = SchnorrSignature::sign_raw(&k, r, challenge.bytes()).unwrap();
        let public_key = RistrettoPublicKey::from_secret_key(&k);
        let sig = signature.get_signature().as_bytes();
        let nonce = signature.get_public_nonce().as_bytes();

        comm.append(&[1]); // version
        comm.append(public_key.as_bytes());
        comm.append(sig);
        comm.append(nonce);
        comm.reply_ok();
    },
    
```

BOLOS applications communicate using [APDU](https://developers.ledger.com/docs/speculos/user/clients/). This means the first 5 bytes are information such as the instruction, arguments, etc. Because we know our challenge will be 32 bytes we can ignore byte 4 which will be the length of the byte and just straight up read our challenge from the buffer. 
We then construct our signature using stripped-down code from [Tari crypto](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-crypto).
We can then fill in the buffer with `comm.append` to send the results back to the desktop application. Following the APDU standard we should send over the byte length of each field before its field, but because each field will be exactly 32 bytes we can ignore it.

Before compiling the code, we need to copy over the target information depending on which device we want to target. These target files are located with the [RUST SDK](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledger-nanos-sdk/) as [NanoS](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledger-nanos-sdk/blob/master/nanos.json), [NanoX](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledger-nanos-sdk/blob/master/nanox.json),[NanoS+](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/ledger-nanos-sdk/blob/master/nanosplus.json). 
We want to target the NanoS+ for now, so we copy that file over to our root directory of the project. 

To compile our project we use the command:
```
cargo +nightly build -Zbuild-std --release --target=nanosplus.json
```
And finally to load it onto our ledger we use:
```
cargo +nightly ledger --load nanosplus
```
Following the prompts on the NanoS+ to install it.

## The Desktop application
Luckily here we have the power to use RUST `std` so we don't have the same limitations as the BOLOS counterpart. Also Zondax the developers of Polkadot have published some very nice helper libraries to help us develop our application: [ledger-rs](https://github.com/Zondax/ledger-rs).

Let's highlight certain parts of the code. 

The first important step is to get a connection to the ledger:
```rust
let ledger = TransportNativeHID::new(hidapi()).expect("Could not get a device");
```
The next important step is to construct the ADPU command:
```rust
let command = APDUCommand {
        cla: 0x80,
        ins: 0x02,
        p1: 0x00,
        p2: 0x00,
        data: challenge.as_bytes().clone(),
    };
```
It is important to note that the eventual command will insert as byte 5, the length of the data field before the data. But here with `0x02` we specify for the ledger we want to call the `sign` command as above, and we include the challenge it must use.

Then we send it to the ledger with:
```rust
let result = ledger.exchange(&command2).unwrap();
```

We then read and verify our results by getting the data back from the ADPU:
```rust
    let public_key = &result.data()[1..33];
    let public_key = RistrettoPublicKey::from_bytes(public_key).unwrap();

    let sig = &result.data()[33..65];
    let sig = RistrettoSecretKey::from_bytes(sig).unwrap();

    let nonce = &result.data()[65..97];
    let nonce = RistrettoPublicKey::from_bytes(nonce).unwrap();

    let signature = RistrettoSchnorr::new(nonce, sig);
    let result = signature.verify(&public_key, &challenge);
    println!("sign: {}", result);
```

## Conclusion
Here we can see a very simple working example written in RUST and on a non-Linux machine. The complete code is available here: [github](SOMELINK)