---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2024-10-28
author: solivagant
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Working
class: subpage
---

---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2024-10-28
author: solivagant
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Working Title
class: subpage
---

# Minotari - Base Layer
## Connectivity
A host of improvements and additions have been added to Minotari. 
* We’ve added the option to configure multiple DNS servers for improved resilience. By default, Cloudflare, Google and Quad9’s DNS servers are provided, and Tari will cycle through them if noe is unable to respond (https://github.com/tari-project/tari/pull/6629)
* Alignment of the mobile wallet recovery process to match that of the console wallet: the mobile wallet now works with a list of base nodes, rather than a single peer. (https://github.com/tari-project/tari/pull/6636)
* Improved wallet base node connectivity by introducing a cool-down between base node connection attempts to the same node when multiple nodes are available in the base node peer manager. (https://github.com/tari-project/tari/commit/8bc8166a48973632f2748c495e61d738f44c55a3)

# The Ootle
While a lot (we mean, ***a lot***) of focus has been on Universe and its associated features, sterling progress continues to be made on the Ootle. As the layer responsible for supporting all of the envisioned digital assets and dapp uses for the Tari network, it's important that the Ootle is robust and fully-featured as possible.

We'd like to highlight the ongoing work that ensures every component of Tari is offering its best:

* The Tari Indexer has had new information tabs added to its UI, letting users visualize substates and events on the blockchain. You can view [the new sections here](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1171)
* A new feature to the Tari Swarm Daemon includes the option to auto mine. The daemon is a key component of being able to test contracts, templates and fundamentals of the Ootle layer ([PR #1174](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1174))
* Work done on the mempool and Hotstuff consensus consolidates the broadcasting mechanism under gossipsub


# P2Pool
P2Pool is an immensely popular feature, but as it stands, the public pool's needed a little TLC over the past two weeks to get it in working order. Community contributors have been measuring pH levels, balancing chemicals and even finding some to throw in some pool tubes and wave machines for your enjoyment.

Metaphor aside, P2Pool has been a core focus for the community, with several bug fixes, feature improvements and enhancments to the feature:

* 