---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2024-07-24
author: solivagant
thumbnail: update-133.png
title: Developer Update September 27
class: subpage
---
# The Dev Update

It's been a while since our last Developer Update, and you might be wondering where we've been. Oh, just birthing a universe - and that takes time! But we've now ignited the fuse on that Big Bang, which is rapidly expanding.

What are we talking about? Buckle up, because this update is a big one. We have some exciting news to share alongside your regular assortment of fixes, improvements, and new features.

## The Universe Welcomes You
Firstly, we’re proud to announce the (limited) [release of Tari Universe](https://universe.tari.com)! Tari Universe is a major stepping stone for the Tari project, providing a slick, user-friendly way for the average netizen to get involved with, “all that Bitcoin stuff.”

A graphically pleasing desktop application, Universe automates and simplifies much of the setup and management that would go into running your own dedicated Tari miner. If you haven’t already, we encourage you to [visit the launch website](https://universe.tari.com) and sign up for the waitlist to get early access to Universe and see what we’re doing with it.

It’s been incredibly popular, and it’s no secret why: you can learn a little more through our latest [Tari Cape Town Episode on Youtube](https://youtu.be/bPG0MdaXwlA?feature=shared), where we discuss the importance of being exponentially better, whether in the underlying technology or the user experience.

<div align="center">
  <iframe width="560" height="315"  src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bPG0MdaXwlA" 
    title="Tari Cape Town Episode 3" 
    allow="autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" 
  allowfullscreen>
  </iframe>
</div>

We’d also like to thank the broader Tari community - veterans and newcomers alike - who are exploring the Universe, putting it through its paces, and providing valuable feedback. Since being made available on the 12th of September, Tari Universe has seen major improvements and tweaks:

* Multiple improvements to the user interface: allowing users to control their rate of mining, change their localization (currently English, Afrikaans, Turkish, or Polish; we’ll be covering how you can add your localizations in the next update), or get stats on other related Tari services and applications (such as referrals and gems from [the Tari Airdrop Game](https://airdrop.tari.com).
* Incorporating community favorite features such as integrated, simple P2Pool functionality (discussed [in our previous update](https://tari.com/updates/2024-07-22-update-133), P2Pool delivers smaller but more consistent mining rewards) and merge mining while making it incredibly simple to run for the average user.

## The Ootle - Tari’s Second Layer
Ootle has seen several significant fixes, optimizations, and new features over the past two months. But, in particular, there’s been a lot of focus on handling cross-shard exchanges and improving Ootle's consensus model.

### Better Consensus
Fixes and finessing have been the real name of the game for Ootle’s consensus model. Whether improving the security of transactions or tackling the incentive structure for securing good behavior, the consensus is that our consensus is in a better place than ever. Some notable fixes include (but are certainly not limited to):

* Many improvements on the transaction creation process; the inclusion of evidence data; reduced validator node setup time and more ([PR 1141](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1141))
* Fixing of substate pledges in multi-shard implementations ([PR 1119](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1119))
* Deference of proposed transactions with conflicting input versions for multi-shard environments ([PR 1125](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1125))
* Improvements around evidence data, including optimization and security improvements such as the inclusion of a unique QC ID for auditing purposes. ([PR 1141](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1141), [PR 1130](https://github.com/tari-project/tari-dan/pull/1130))

## The Tari Protocol

The Tari protocol continues to see improvements and additional features. One that we’d like to highlight in this update is the  work done on the hot/cold wallet functionality.

### Whither Which Wallet?
Building on the new View Key feature [mentioned in our previous update](https://tari.com/updates/2024-07-22-update-133), we’ve added the ability to create read-only wallets with access to the view key of an existing wallet. As a result, it’s now possible to have a cold wallet with the capability to spend AND receive funds as well as act on any transactions that come in: a significant development that removes the need for a hot spending wallet for online transactions and exchanges.

Previously, Tari required a traditional hot wallet, which had several concerning security implications. Now, with a view-only hot wallet, mining can be conducted while ensuring the seed words - the key to your wallet - are encrypted while mining. We’ve already implemented it in Tari Universe as a standard, ensuring built-in security for the average user.
