---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2024-03-27
author: Hansie Odendaal
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: Launchpad on Windows
subtitles: Windows workarounds for Launchpad.
class: subpage
---

## What is different?

With the current release, there are some differences in _Copy - Paste_ behaviour on Windows compared to Ubuntu and Mac. This post will guide you through the changes and how to work around them.

```
>> Emoji IDs cannot be pasted directly into the Launchpad fields on Windows, but, it can be displayed.
```

## Getting started

Follow the instructions in the [installation guide](https://www.tari.com/launchpad-guide/) to get going, just mind the bit where references are made to your wallet address' emoji ID.

## The workaround

The long and short of it is that Launchpad must be run in a Windows Terminal, not Windows Console or Powershell, otherwise paste does not work at all. There are some simple ways to get around this.

### Prerequisites

Windows Terminal must be installed. To see if you have it, type `wt` followed by `Enter` in `Start Menu`. If it is installed, it will start, otherwise, you must install it.

The [official Microsoft article](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/terminal/install) is really good. To install, just follow the simple [_Install_](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/terminal/install#install) instructions.

### Method 1: Set Windows Terminal as the default terminal application

This is the easiest and preferred method. Follow the [_Set your default terminal application_](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/terminal/install#set-your-default-terminal-application) instructions to get it done. From now on, to run Launchpad, just double-click the executable (`tari_launchpad_cli-windows-x64.exe`) and it will start in Windows Terminal.

### Method 2: Run Launchpad via a batch file that starts it in Windows Terminal

If you do not want Windows Terminal to be your default terminal application, you can create a batch file to start Launchpad in Windows Terminal when executed. Just create a batch file called `start.bat` (or similar) and place it next to the Launchpad executable (`tari_launchpad_cli-windows-x64.exe`):

```shell
wt %~dp0tari_launchpad_cli-windows-x64
```

To run Launchpad, just double-click the batch file and it will start in Windows Terminal.

### Method 3: Run Launchpad from the command line to start it in Windows Terminal

If either of the two previous methods do not catch your fancy, you can always start Launchpad in Windows Terminal from the command line. Just navigate to the directory where the Launchpad executable is located and type:

```shell
wt tari_launchpad_cli-windows-x64
```

## Copy-Paste

Only normal text, like the wallet address in hex format, can be pasted directly into the Launchpad fields. To paste, `Ctrl-V` works as usual, but you can also use `Right mouse click` if preferred.

## Thank you

Thank you for bearing with us and being patient in navigating some of these niggling differences between Windows and Ubuntu/Mac.
