---
layout: update
tag: Developer Update
date: 2025-01-24
author: solivagant
thumbnail: update-background-141.png
og_image: /assets/updates/img/update-background-141.png
title: New Year, New Developments
class: subpage
---

The first update of the new year! The community is back into the swing of things from a well-deserved break, but some just couldn't help themselves and continued hammering away at features and issues within the Tari project.

Spoiler: P2Pool is in a much, much better state than it was at the end of last year.

# Tari Universe

## P2Pool

We've made significant progress in a very important category: improving win frequency for most miners. In our recent releases, we've achieved an average win rate of ~70% across miners daily. In addition, miners are now consistently on the correct chain, ensuring parity across the network.

We still have work to do, as miners under 1,000 h/s CPU are only syncing with the network around 50% of the time and, therefore not earning rewards frequently enough. A massive improvement from where we were but still far from our ideal of "everyday people, everyday mining". As many people as possible must benefit from their contribution to Tari’s security model, and we aim to achieve that goal.

For those interested in the numbers, you can see some of the stats below as of version 0.8.42 of Universe:

| Hash Rate Tier | Sync % (CPU ▓ GPU ░) |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| 0.25           | ▓ 56%                |
|                | ░ 54%                |
| 0.50           | ▓ 81%                |
|                | ░ 78%                |
| 0.75           | ▓ 85%                |
|                | ░ 77%                |
| 0.95           | ▓ 86%                |
|                | ░ 96%                |
| 0.99           | ▓ 97%                |
|                | ░ 88%                |

# The Ootle

## The Tari CLI

The Tari CLI tool, [covered in our previous update](https://tari.com/updates/2024-11-26-update-138), has seen numerous improvements, including improved instructions and the option to register template directly via the command line with fee estimation and error feedback (such as attempting to register an already existing template.).

# Aurora Wallet

The Aurora Wallet has seen several improvements over the past 2-3 months. To summarise:

- Have aggressively addressed outstanding PRs to improve the user experience.
- Removed the foreground service previously essential for interactive transactions, which required extensive refactoring and testing.
- Refactored Tx Repository and WalletManager, removing spaghetti code and improving communication between architectural layers.
- Implemented the Paper Wallet feature for secure and intuitive fund management.

A very recent and welcome improvement has been removing the background service used to passively monitor wallet events. The service had a deleterious effect on phone use, system performance, and battery life - a poor user experience. The removal of the background service and adjusting the app to account for its removal has greatly improved phone performance and efficiency when using the app.
